---
layout: post
title: "Exploration of Distributed Hash Algorithms and Overlay Networks: Kademlia"
date: 2014-07-17 13:49:00
---
This post is concerned with the [Kademlia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kademlia) DHT, which was proposed in 2002, the original paper can be found [here](http://pdos.csail.mit.edu/~petar/papers/maymounkov-kademlia-lncs.pdf).

##Overview
Nodes are assigned a 160-bit identifier, and using a lookup algorithm that progressively reduces the distance between the current node and the target nodes. It accomplish this in logarithmic time complexity, because of the structure used to model the network. Nodes are treated as leaves of a binary tree, and the protocol ensures that a node knows at least one node in each of its subtrees, given that it is not empty. This ensures that any node can locate any other node using it identifier.

The core components of this protocol is defined by this API:

1. `PING` = probes a node to see if it is online.

2. `STORE` = instructs a node to store a `<key, value>` pair.

3. `FIND_NODE` = takes an ID as an argument, and returns `<IP, UDP port, ID>` triples for the `k` closest known nodes to the target ID.

4. `FIND_VALUE` = takes an ID as an argument, and returns `<IP, UDP port, ID>` triples for the `k` closest known nodes to the target ID. Except if the recipient of that calls, did store the key, simply returns the value associated with that key.

###Node
These are the different artifacts that a node must store and keep updated in order to make the Kademlia protocol functional.

####k-buckets
Every node keeps a list of `<IP, UDP port, ID>` triples for nodes of distance between `2^i` and `2^i+1` from itself, where `0 <= i <= 160`. These lists are referred to as being `k`-buckets, and everyone of them is kept sorted by time last seen (last-recently seen node at the head).

`k` is a system-wide replication parameter, and it is chose in such a way that any given `k` nodes are very unlikely to fail within an hour of each other.

These `k`-buckets implements a least-recently seen eviction policy, for the exception that live nodes are not removed from the list.

They provide some resistance for certain types of DoS attacks, more precisely by flooding the network with new nodes joining won't cause a node to replace its entries in the `k`-buckets because live nodes are not removed from the list and the longest standing connection prevails when deciding which node to discard between two live nodes.

###Distance Metric
Like previously explored DHTs, Kademlia makes uses of a distance metric, namely a bitwise exclusive or `(XOR)`. What differentiate this metric from the other proposed one, is the following properties:

1. `distance(Node_A, Node_A) = 0`;

2. This metric has the property of being symmetric: `distance(Node_A, Node_B) = distance(Node_B, Node_A)`;

3. Follows the triangle of inequality: `distance(Node_A, Node_C) = distance(Node_A, Node_B) + distance(Node_B, Node_C)`

4. This metric is unidirectional: *For any given point `x` and distance `∆ > 0`, there exists exactly one point `y` such that distance(x, y) = ∆*

	Which implies that all lookups for the same key converge along the same path, regardless of the Initiator.

###Node Lookup
This procedure consist to locate the `k` closest nodes to some given node ID, and it is accomplished in a recursive manner.

1. Lookup initiator picks `(alpha)` nodes from its closest non-empty k-bucket, if this bucket contains less than `(alpha)` entries, simply choose the `(alpha)` closest nodes known.

    i. Initiator sends parallel, asynchronous `FIND_NODE` RPCs to the chosen nodes.
	
	ii. **Recursive Step:** Initiator resends `FIND_NODE` to nodes it has learned about from step (i).
	
	iii. From the response of step (ii), Initiator resends `FIND_NODE` only to the nodes that it didn't queried yet. Any nodes that fails to respond quickly is dismissed from the query.
	
	iv. When an iteration of this recursive step fails to return any new nodes closer to than the closest node already seen, the Initiator sends a `FIND_NODE` to the k closest nodes it hasn't already queried.
	
	v. The lookup terminates when the Initiator has queried and gotten responses from the `k` closest nodes it has seen.
	
###Value Lookup
To retrieve a `<key, value>` pair, a node performs the same algorithm than Node Lookup but instead of using the RPC `FIND_NODE`, it uses the RPC `FIND_VALUE`.

###Routing Table
The Routing table in the Kademlia protocol are represented by a binary tree whose leaves are `k`-buckets. Where each `k`-buckets contains the nodes sharing common prefixes relatively to their IDs, and the prefixes represent the position of the `k`-buckets in the binary tree. The complete ID space is covered by these `k`-buckets, each covering some range of that space without overlaps.

###Key Re-Publishing
Kademlia ensure the persistence of key-value pairs by forcing the nodes to periodically (once an hour), re-publish their keys. This periodicity is chosen in the hopes of countering the effects of nodes leaving the network. Initially this seems very inefficient, duplicate re-publishing of similar keys, but the authors proposes two optimizations that reduce the re-publishing to once an hour for any `<key, value>` pair. Meaning that only one node will do it, and once it is done any other concerned node will simply refrain since it was already re-publish within that hour.

This pretty much summarize the functioning and the features of Kademlia, the final post in this Exploration series will serve as a comparison of all the DHT studied yet.