---
layout: post
title: Exploration of Distributed Hash Algorithms and Overlay Networks
---
This series of posts will simply serve as a central repository of my findings, thoughts and ideas about the subject of DHT in the context of Overlay Networks. More specifically, my exploration has for purpose to find the most suitable candidate to implement a Peer-to-peer architecture. Without further ado, let's start with some basic definition and try to understand a bit more what these algorithms are intended for, but also how can they apply to the problem at hand.

#Overlay Networks
What is an [Overlay Network](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Overlay_network)? As defined in the Wikipedia article: *[...] (It) is a computer network which is built on top of another network [...]* The network on top of which the overlay network is built, can be, in general, thought as a physical network with physical connections. Therefore, the overlay network represent the logical (or virtual) connection between each nodes, and this enables to represent the physical path between two nodes, in terms of the logical connection or relation. As an example, if **Node A** is indirectly connected to **Node B** in the physical network architecture:

(A --> C --> D --> B)

In the overlay network the same connection can be expressed as:

(A --> B)

Thus it simplifies and abstracts the physical characteristics of the underlying network structure. One the Overlay Network protocols, based on TCP/IP is Distributed Hash Tables (DHTs).

#Distributed Hash Tables
Distributed Hash Tables originated from the ever augmenting amount of [p2p applications](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peer-to-peer#Applications) for file sharing and content delivery. The requirements that rose from this phenomena were the following: a need for an autonomous and decentralized system where the participating nodes forms the system; enhanced reliability of said system even in the presence of nodes continuously joining, leaving and/or failing; and the need for high scalability in the presence of thousands and millions of nodes.

DHTs can be described as a decentralized distributed system providing lookup services, in a manner similar to a hash table using key-value pairs. The responsibility of maintaining the mappings is evenly distributed among the nodes composing the system. As a direct consequence there is no single point of failure and this leads to a highly-dynamic distributed system.

##Typical Structure
The structure of a typical DHT can be seen as an aggregation of these three components: the Keyspace, the Keyspace Partitioning Scheme, and the Overlay Network.

###Keyspace and its Partitioning Scheme
The most basic structural element of the DHT is the Keyspace, which can be represented as being a set of n-bit strings. (i.e.: 256-bit strings `Keyspace = 2^256`) On top of this lies the Keyspace Partitioning Scheme, it's purpose is to divide the ownership of the keyspace among the participating nodes. Each participating node only needs to be in sync with a few other nodes in the system, which reduce the work needed when it leaves or joins the network. Generally it need to coordinate with `O(log n)` of the `n` participating nodes.

Different kind of hashing techniques can be used to map the keys to nodes, but most DHT uses a variant known as *[Consistent hashing](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consistent_hashing)*. The main advantage of using this technique over traditional hashing, is that in case of addition or removal of a node on average, only `K / n` keys needs to be remapped, where `K = number of keys` and `n = number of slots (nodes)`.

More specifically using this technique involves the concept of "distance" between keys, note that it doesn't relate to geographical distance or temporal distance, but rather as an abstraction of distance within the structure of the system. This "distance" is computable by means of a function: `dist(key_1, key_2)`; each node is assigned a key which serves as a unique ID and are responsible for all the keys that are the closest to that ID according to the "distance" function.

###Overlay Network
All the participating nodes maintains a table containing the links to the other nodes, it's neighbors, and all of those (routing) tables compose the Overlay Network. The neighbors or nodes that populate those tables are selected according to the network's topology, which can vary from DHT to DHT.

It boils down to this, each node has for each key either: a node ID that owns that key or a link to the closest node ID to that key (according to the concept of "distance" defined earlier). Thus, each node has access to each key in the DHT, either directly or indirectly and one can easily imagined how to do key-based routing using a greedy approach.

But routing can be optimized if we take into account the maximum number of hops and the maximum degree of each node. These two constraints are crucial to diminish the length of the route (max. number of hops) and the overhead required maintain the network structure (max. degree). 

##Different DHT Implementations
Here is a quick list of the different DHT Implementations that I will cover in this Exploration series:

1. <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chord_(DHT)">Chord</a>
2. [Koorde](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Koorde)
3. <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pastry_(DHT)">Pastry</a>
4. [Kademlia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kademlia)

Finally, I will do a summary of all the differences and similarities of these DHTs.